Speaker 1:  Welcome to the Audible Original Series, Where Should We Begin, with Esther Perel.
Speaker 1:  There's more Esther coming soon. Season 2 of this series and her new audiobook, The State of Affairs.
Speaker 1:  Learn more at audible.com slash Esther. That's audible.com slash E-S-T-H-E-R.
Speaker 2:  What you're about to hear is an unscripted, one-time couples counseling session.
Speaker 2:  It contains mature themes and listener discretion is advised.
Speaker 2:  For the purposes of maintaining confidentiality, names and some identifiable characteristics have been removed.
Speaker 2:  But their voices and their stories are real.
Speaker 3:  We met each other in college, an opera scenes workshop, actually.
Speaker 3:  Our director kept putting us in scenes together, and by the end of the term we finally figured out
Speaker 3:  that, oh, that romantic thing that you were doing, well, that was actually real.
Speaker 3:  That wasn't just acting.
Speaker 4:  Desire and attraction. That has never been there for us.
Speaker 4:  And we were part of what was called the evangelical purity culture movement of the late 90s.
Speaker 3:  We have changed our views since then.
Speaker 3:  We're both spiritual sort of people.
Speaker 3:  I guess I tend more toward the atheistic side now.
Speaker 3:  But it was really important to us to remain pure until marriage.
Speaker 4:  My husband and I didn't kiss until we got engaged.
Speaker 4:  And the night that I got engaged, I kicked him.
Speaker 4:  And even though my heart and my head knew I was totally in love with this man,
Speaker 4:  my body was screaming, no, this is not right.
Speaker 3:  We're two survivors of childhood sexual abuse who managed to find one another, get married,
Speaker 3:  and then find out that we were sexually mismatched.
Speaker 3:  But not only that, we were sort of, you know, each of us within our own cauldron of sexual confusion and dysfunction.
Speaker 4:  Anytime I try to have sex with him, I feel like I'm forcing myself.
Speaker 4:  It feels incestuous.
Speaker 4:  Two years ago, my adult sexuality came bursting out.
Speaker 4:  I ended up realizing that I really loved sex.
Speaker 4:  I just did not love sex with my husband.
Speaker 3:  She would like sex to be much more energetic.
Speaker 3:  I'd like it to come out of a place where I feel safe.
Speaker 4:  I'm not willing to walk away from my marriage.
Speaker 4:  But what I need to know is, can we learn to be attracted to one another?
Speaker 5:  So when I listen to this couple, I am imagining that sex for these two people at this point has become a subject that is so fraught,
Speaker 5:  that is mired in pain, in trauma, and that is very serious.
Speaker 5:  And that from that place, not much change can come.
Speaker 5:  So I'm thinking, how do I guide them to at least one experience where sexuality for them can be experienced with lightness, with fun, with joy?
Speaker 5:  People come in with a story.
Speaker 5:  At the end of the first session, I want them to live with a different story.
Speaker 5:  Because a different story is what breeds hope, is what gives them the sense of possibility.
Speaker 2:  And this is Where Should We Begin? with Esther Perel.
Speaker 5:  You need a new perspective.
Speaker 5:  Otherwise, it's going to be one more interesting chat, but with no movement.
Speaker 5:  And then you start to feel more hopeless each time.
Speaker 5:  So I want a tiny bit more info, just so I have a sense of what you've done, because I understand I'm not the first person you're speaking with.
Speaker 5:  But I also have this idea that maybe you would do the entire session.
Speaker 5:  There's two options.
Speaker 5:  One is, you change names.
Speaker 5:  And then I thought, since you sing, right?
Speaker 5:  Yeah.
Speaker 5:  You could speak with different accents, but you need to become different people in play.
Speaker 5:  Or I blindfold you.
Speaker 5:  Or I ask you to close your eyes, basically.
Speaker 5:  And you do the entire session without looking at each other.
Speaker 5:  Which one do we?
Speaker 5:  You can say no to all the above, of course.
Speaker 6:  I will change names.
Speaker 6:  But I would also be kind of curious to blindfold, because I am so...
Speaker 6:  I people-please a lot by getting people's facial reactions.
Speaker 6:  So I'm, like, looking at you for every single reaction, trying to judge it all.
Speaker 6:  And if I was blindfolded, maybe I would be able to hear things in a different way.
Speaker 5:  That's exactly the way I thought of it.
Speaker 5:  I thought, how do I change your perspective?
Speaker 5:  And if it gets uncomfortable or inane, we take... we stop.
Speaker 5:  Just the first thing I think about when I see stuckness is,
Speaker 5:  where do I introduce something completely new?
Speaker 5:  Since she always sees him in a certain way,
Speaker 5:  and she sees him as this man that is like this and that is...
Speaker 5:  I thought, what if I close her eyes?
Speaker 5:  She'll see something else.
Speaker 5:  And in fact, she'll have to listen more.
Speaker 5:  She'll have to sense more.
Speaker 5:  She'll have to experience touch more.
Speaker 5:  So that was really that.
Speaker 5:  How do I change the perception?
Speaker 5:  Oh, it'd be so interesting.
Speaker 5:  What would happen if I closed her eyes for an entire session?
Speaker 5:  So she had the scarf on her until almost till the end.
Speaker 5:  Close your eyes.
Speaker 5:  Put that thing on.
Speaker 5:  I'll help you.
Speaker 5:  Thank you.
Speaker 7:  Well, I can certainly do the first option.
Speaker 6:  The changing names?
Speaker 7:  Yeah, because I have a character.
Speaker 6:  This actually happened spontaneously.
Speaker 6:  There's one that he just started speaking to me in French.
Speaker 6:  And we call this character Jean-Claude.
Speaker 6:  And it's everything that I wanted from a partner.
Speaker 6:  He's very arrogant and sexy.
Speaker 6:  And we've been playing with this for a couple of months now.
Speaker 6:  And it's really helped a lot.
Speaker 6:  But it's to the point where I'm just like, can Jean-Claude come home?
Speaker 6:  Can Scott stay outside?
Speaker 6:  And I think you've gotten a little...
Speaker 6:  Is it fair to say you're a little jealous of Jean-Claude?
Speaker 8:  I don't often bring him out spontaneously or without an invitation.
Speaker 8:  Because it's not the person that I inhabit.
Speaker 8:  But it's a person that I would like to inhabit more.
Speaker 8:  And in my individual therapy, my therapist tries to encourage me to inhabit that character more.
Speaker 8:  But that character has no sexual hang-ups.
Speaker 8:  That character has no...
Speaker 8:  None of the problems that I face.
Speaker 5:  That is fantastic.
Speaker 8:  But half of the problem with it is that she doesn't understand anything that I'm saying.
Speaker 8:  Which means...
Speaker 8:  On s'en fout.
Speaker 5:  As they say, who cares?
Speaker 5:  I know, right?
Speaker 5:  It doesn't matter.
Speaker 5:  She doesn't have to understand.
Speaker 5:  She energetically gets you.
Speaker 5:  It is actually wonderful.
Speaker 10:  D'accord.
Speaker 5:  And I will do the translation.
Speaker 5:  Thank you.
Speaker 5:  But, in a way, she doesn't need the words.
Speaker 5:  Because she's going to sense you differently.
Speaker 5:  She's going to see you differently.
Speaker 5:  By not understanding you, she will actually see you differently.
Speaker 5:  She has already.
Speaker 5:  She will feel you differently.
Speaker 5:  And all of that is equivalent to communication.
Speaker 5:  So...
Speaker 10:  Bonjour, Jean-Claude!
Speaker 9:  Bonjour, Sté.
Speaker 10:  It's like the French lesson, you know?
Speaker 10:  Il est un peu nerveux.
Speaker 10:  Bien sûr, bien sûr.
Speaker 5:  Le plus important, the most important thing, is that Jean-Claude is as real to you as God.
Speaker 5:  But Jean-Claude, one cooks, one makes love.
Speaker 5:  One speaks one way, one speaks the other way.
Speaker 5:  One holds himself in a certain tightness, the other one, as you say, has no hang-ups.
Speaker 5:  And he lives inside of you.
Speaker 5:  And if you can play him, then you are him.
Speaker 5:  And you get to experience him.
Speaker 5:  And you bifurcate the entire stuckness.
Speaker 11:  Do you have another name, too?
Speaker 6:  Oh, sometimes he calls me Jacqueline, when we're in the French.
Speaker 10:  Super!
Speaker 10:  Super!
Speaker 10:  Super!
Speaker 5:  When he is different, he calls you by a different name, too.
Speaker 10:  That's it.
Speaker 10:  We're done.
Speaker 10:  You can go.
Speaker 5:  And then I feel that people have given me the permission.
Speaker 5:  They trust me.
Speaker 5:  They trust me and they say, take us out of this mess.
Speaker 5:  Help us.
Speaker 5:  And I feel that that permission emboldens me.
Speaker 5:  It allows me to then say, we're going to play together.
Speaker 5:  And if at any point it stops feeling like it's play, we stop.
Speaker 6:  Right now, I want to reach out and grab Scott's hand because I'm afraid, because I can't see.
Speaker 6:  And I'm afraid of what Jean-Claude's going to be.
Speaker 6:  And I want safe, familial Scott to hold my hand during this right now.
Speaker 6:  And this is our problem.
Speaker 6:  Too much cozy.
Speaker 6:  Not enough.
Speaker 6:  Not enough difference.
Speaker 5:  You're welcome to go reach out for his hand, but you may find the hand of Jean-Claude.
Speaker 5:  They're not so separate.
Speaker 5:  One dangerous, one safe.
Speaker 5:  Maybe Jean-Claude is safe, too.
Speaker 5:  You've got it completely divided.
Speaker 12:  Totally.
Speaker 12:  So.
Speaker 12:  Try it.
Speaker 6:  You know, when you are touching Jean-Claude, it's a different grip.
Speaker 6:  Scott usually has this lethargic limp, kind of no support.
Speaker 6:  But with Jean-Claude, I feel you gripping my hand differently.
Speaker 6:  I feel like my hand can relax in yours.
Speaker 6:  It's very different from the way you normally hold my hand.
Speaker 8:  I feel very strong.
Speaker 6:  And as soon as I hear your accent, I get all giddy and I shiver a little bit.
Speaker 5:  He feels powerful and strong.
Speaker 6:  I love that.
Speaker 6:  That's what I've always wanted for you.
Speaker 6:  I've always wanted to be the one where you could be the one in charge and I didn't have to be.
Speaker 6:  I love that.
Speaker 6:  I love that.
Speaker 8:  I love that.
Speaker 8:  It's a bit difficult for Scott to relinquish.
Speaker 5:  To let her prise.
Speaker 8:  To let her prise.
Speaker 8:  To let her prise.
Speaker 8:  To let her prise.
Speaker 8:  To let her prise.
Speaker 8:  To let her prise.
Speaker 5:  Scott struggles to let go.
Speaker 5:  Et Jean-Claude?
Speaker 5:  He's confident, Jean-Claude.
Speaker 8:  Jean-Claude knows what he wants.
Speaker 8:  What he's going to do.
Speaker 5:  Jean-Claude always knows what he wants and what he's going to do.
Speaker 6:  And that is so not Scott.
Speaker 6:  That is so different then.
Speaker 8:  He has been locked up in a basement with a key.
Speaker 5:  And explain to me who had the key.
Speaker 5:  Who locked him up or why did he lock himself up?
Speaker 5:  My mother.
Speaker 15:  My mother and my father.
Speaker 5:  And my father.
Speaker 5:  Now you're talking as Scott, so you can say it in English.
Speaker 8:  My mom shut down my sexuality when I was just coming into it.
Speaker 8:  And made it clear that I was not to be like my father, who enjoyed sex.
Speaker 8:  I was not to be like other men who I think must have demanded sex of her.
Speaker 8:  I was to be the good boy.
Speaker 8:  I was to be the perfect husband.
Speaker 8:  And she made me into something of a surrogate husband.
Speaker 8:  Oversharing.
Speaker 8:  And I, in response to that, shamed myself whenever I felt sexual.
Speaker 8:  And tried to be only intellectual.
Speaker 8:  In fact, I shut down all of my emotions.
Speaker 5:  So you became part of the purity movement?
Speaker 8:  Yes.
Speaker 5:  The church, it gave you?
Speaker 8:  The church gave me a place of safety.
Speaker 8:  Where other people were supporting me in not being sexually active.
Speaker 8:  Where it was sacred to be non-sexual before marriage.
Speaker 8:  I mean, I became part of the religion mainly because it was a source of friends.
Speaker 8:  It was a source of people who were like-minded, who wanted to be good.
Speaker 8:  And who sanctified goodness above all else.
Speaker 5:  So here's one thing I want to challenge.
Speaker 5:  Scott good, Jean-Claude bad.
Speaker 5:  Because that's more of the same.
Speaker 8:  It is.
Speaker 5:  I want you to imagine good and sexual.
Speaker 5:  Because if you're going to use this very interesting line of sex is bad and dirty, but save it for the one you love.
Speaker 5:  How do you make Jean-Claude sexual, adult, responsible, and good?
Speaker 8:  Scott wants to be a good boy.
Speaker 8:  And Jean-Claude is a bad boy.
Speaker 16:  Well, that's good because I like bad boys.
Speaker 8:  Scott doesn't like bad boys.
Speaker 5:  Scott doesn't like bad boys.
Speaker 5:  And Jacqueline loves the bad boys.
Speaker 5:  And a part of why sometimes a woman likes the bad boy is not because she likes to be very, very clear.
Speaker 5:  It's not because she likes the man to be a predator.
Speaker 5:  But it's because the bad boy, as you described, knows to take care of himself perfectly well.
Speaker 5:  Thank you.
Speaker 5:  And so he frees her from having to feel responsible for him, for having to worry about him, from having to experience his anxiety.
Speaker 5:  And so since he can let go and is in his pleasure, it frees her up to be in her pleasure.
Speaker 5:  Yes.
Speaker 5:  You want to put this in your own words, Madame Jacqueline?
Speaker 5:  Yes.
Speaker 5:  Yes.
Speaker 6:  So often I feel like I'm editing myself around you sexually.
Speaker 6:  I feel like if I breathe wrong, if I move wrong, if I'm too playful, if I'm too strong, that I will turn Scott off.
Speaker 6:  Because that is what has happened.
Speaker 6:  And I feel like when you are Jean-Claude, when you are connected to your passion and your badness, I feel like I am free to bring all of who I am.
Speaker 8:  Jean-Claude would say that you believe me.
Speaker 5:  Jean-Claude wants you to trust him.
Speaker 5:  Jean-Claude wants you to know that he is holding your hand.
Speaker 6:  Can you handle all of me?
Speaker 8:  Jean-Claude can hold you.
Speaker 5:  Jean-Claude can withstand the force of your desire.
Speaker 5:  Jean-Claude doesn't feel threatened by it.
Speaker 5:  You don't have to worry with Jean-Claude that you've held back for so many years.
Speaker 5:  He's got you.
Speaker 17:  I would love to believe that that is true.
Speaker 5:  But wait, I need to check if that fits him.
Speaker 15:  Je pense que oui.
Speaker 15:  Oui?
Speaker 15:  Oui, je pense que oui.
Speaker 8:  C'est un petit parti de tout de mon être.
Speaker 8:  Mm-hmm.
Speaker 5:  C'est un petit 카�,ël ou c'est un petit aspect français.
Speaker 5:  C'est cap, ou c'est une partie de personne.
Speaker 5:  And oui, c'est un petit act, c'est un rappel sur mon miles understand ça.
Speaker 5:  And, yes, c'est un peu.
Speaker 5:  C'est un peu par however il faut que je suis, c'est un peu, c'est un peu bas...
Speaker 6:  C'est un peu defarour de moi, parce que je suis, c'est un peu très cher par mais...
Speaker 5:  C'est un peu baseman, c'est un peu Kont, c'est un peu comme il faut tournoir.
Speaker 5:  too much and therefore you have to hold back, which you have now transferred onto, he can't
Speaker 5:  handle me, and then made it his issue because he's too fragile and I have to protect him
Speaker 5:  and therefore I have to mother him and I have to hold back.
Speaker 5:  You're putting on him a fear that is yours.
Speaker 5:  And the fantasy is if I felt and if I was with somebody hugely powerful, then I won't
Speaker 5:  be too much.
Speaker 5:  It's like the bigger they are, the more they can take me on versus maybe not too much.
Speaker 5:  You have no idea on some level.
Speaker 5:  So tell me about the I was too much at home.
Speaker 6:  As a child?
Speaker 6:  Oh, I was the black sheep of the family.
Speaker 6:  I was too loud.
Speaker 6:  I was too outspoken.
Speaker 6:  And any time I did voice my opinions, I was verbally and emotionally abused to the point
Speaker 6:  where I was just terrified.
Speaker 6:  to feel what I feel, to express what I feel because it would just come with such a big
Speaker 6:  smack down.
Speaker 6:  And it's been great being with Scott because he's been the first person who has made it
Speaker 6:  safe for me to talk about these truths with the exception of sexuality.
Speaker 6:  In sexuality, I feel like I have tried to bring more of my wild side to you.
Speaker 6:  And Scott.
Speaker 6:  To him.
Speaker 6:  Hmm?
Speaker 6:  Sorry?
Speaker 6:  Scott isn't here right now.
Speaker 18:  Oh, sorry.
Speaker 18:  Jean-Claude.
Speaker 18:  I love that you can...
Speaker 5:  You've brought your wild side to Scott and things didn't go well.
Speaker 5:  But right now in this room, you're talking with Jean-Claude.
Speaker 18:  Jean-Claude.
Speaker 5:  Working with role play in therapy has a long tradition that comes from psychodrama that
Speaker 5:  was started by Moreno.
Speaker 5:  We have a tendency to get stuck in our role, in our own view of things, in the way I see
Speaker 5:  us.
Speaker 5:  A couple that has been together for a long time can often recite the other person's
Speaker 5:  lines by heart.
Speaker 5:  By now, they know exactly what the other one's going to say.
Speaker 5:  And so you use role play to increase empathy.
Speaker 5:  You use role play to step outside of the narrowness of one's own perspective.
Speaker 5:  You use role play to give people the option to actually tell the other person what they
Speaker 5:  would like to hear from them.
Speaker 6:  Jean-Claude, I so want to open myself up to you.
Speaker 6:  I want to bring everything of who I am to you and have you meet it with your energy.
Speaker 6:  But can you...
Speaker 6:  Can your spirit dance with mine?
Speaker 6:  Can you not care if you look silly when you dance?
Speaker 6:  Will you just dance with me anyway?
Speaker 6:  Can you not care how droopy we get as we get older?
Speaker 6:  Can you still look at me with lust for the spirit that's inside of me?
Speaker 6:  Can you not shame me for the fact that I have wild fantasies and want to act them all
Speaker 6:  out and that I'm not even remotely conservative like my family would like me to be?
Speaker 6:  Can you not shame me for that?
Speaker 6:  Can you say these are the things I love about you as opposed to the things that...
Speaker 6:  These are the things I want to punish you for?
Speaker 5:  Thank you.
Speaker 5:  Monsieur.
Speaker 5:  Madame.
Speaker 8:  Je voudrais faire tout ça avec toi.
Speaker 8:  Comme tu es.
Speaker 5:  I want to do all of this with you.
Speaker 5:  The way you are.
Speaker 6:  Are you sure?
Speaker 8:  Comme Jean-Claude?
Speaker 8:  Oui.
Speaker 8:  Comme Jean-Claude.
Speaker 5:  Jean-Claude.
Speaker 5:  Oui.
Speaker 5:  Ce que Jacqueline a besoin d'entendre,
Speaker 5:  what Jacqueline, I think, needs to hear from you,
Speaker 5:  is that it is okay for her
Speaker 5:  to bring out the full spectrum of her sexuality
Speaker 5:  and that it won't be shamed
Speaker 5:  or vilified
Speaker 5:  or used
Speaker 5:  or abused
Speaker 5:  as it was.
Speaker 5:  There is no greater vengeance
Speaker 5:  than to be
Speaker 5:  the most happy one can be.
Speaker 5:  There is no greater vengeance against sexual abuse
Speaker 5:  than to reclaim
Speaker 5:  one's full sexuality
Speaker 5:  and celebrate it.
Speaker 5:  And this woman
Speaker 5:  would like to celebrate with you.
Speaker 5:  But when you have created together
Speaker 5:  the family
Speaker 5:  that you both didn't have,
Speaker 5:  it feels like you can't bring
Speaker 5:  that lustfulness home.
Speaker 5:  So how do you
Speaker 5:  bring lust home
Speaker 5:  and how do you put the ex back in sex?
Speaker 5:  Jean-Claude brings the ex.
Speaker 5:  And Jacqueline brings the ex.
Speaker 5:  So imagine Jacqueline
Speaker 5:  reaching out
Speaker 5:  to this Frenchman of yours.
Speaker 5:  Il est grand, il est beau.
Speaker 5:  He's tall, he's gorgeous.
Speaker 5:  He knows what he wants.
Speaker 5:  He's quite confident.
Speaker 5:  He knows what he wants
Speaker 5:  and what he wants is you.
Speaker 5:  When he strokes your hand,
Speaker 5:  he's not making sure
Speaker 5:  if he's doing it right.
Speaker 5:  He's doing what he enjoys.
Speaker 5:  as he's doing right now.
Speaker 5:  So breathe this in, Jacqueline.
Speaker 6:  That's very different
Speaker 6:  from the way Scott touches me.
Speaker 6:  There's nothing tentative
Speaker 6:  about Jean-Claude's touch.
Speaker 6:  Jean-Claude touches
Speaker 6:  with tenderness but intention.
Speaker 6:  There's a certain pressure
Speaker 6:  without force.
Speaker 6:  There's no clumsiness.
Speaker 6:  It's beautiful.
Speaker 6:  It's what I've always wanted.
Speaker 15:  Merci.
Speaker 8:  C'est différent parce que tu...
Speaker 8:  parce que tu...
Speaker 8:  Je te touche
Speaker 8:  pour mon plaisir.
Speaker 12:  Super.
Speaker 5:  It's different
Speaker 5:  because when I touch you
Speaker 5:  as Jean-Claude,
Speaker 5:  I touch you
Speaker 5:  for my pleasure.
Speaker 5:  Hmm.
Speaker 6:  And yet,
Speaker 6:  I feel more pleasure
Speaker 6:  because of it.
Speaker 6:  Yes.
Speaker 6:  It's so different.
Speaker 5:  What they don't know
Speaker 5:  is how to make the transition
Speaker 5:  from not hurting
Speaker 5:  to enjoying.
Speaker 5:  That's the work.
Speaker 5:  And a lot of the work
Speaker 5:  on sexual trauma
Speaker 5:  is often very good
Speaker 5:  at healing the break
Speaker 5:  and at putting on the cast
Speaker 5:  and even at removing the cast.
Speaker 5:  But it doesn't do
Speaker 5:  the re-education afterwards.
Speaker 5:  The re-education afterwards
Speaker 5:  is the joy,
Speaker 5:  the openness,
Speaker 5:  the play,
Speaker 5:  the freedom,
Speaker 5:  the pleasure.
Speaker 8:  Tu te touches
Speaker 8:  comme je veux
Speaker 8:  être touchée
Speaker 5:  de toi.
Speaker 5:  I touch you
Speaker 5:  as I want to be touched
Speaker 5:  by you.
Speaker 5:  I touch you
Speaker 5:  without the fear
Speaker 5:  of being selfish.
Speaker 5:  Oh.
Speaker 5:  Oui?
Speaker 8:  Oui, oui, c'est ça.
Speaker 8:  Et sans peur
Speaker 8:  de...
Speaker 8:  de...
Speaker 8:  de...
Speaker 8:  de...
Speaker 8:  criticism.
Speaker 5:  I touch you
Speaker 5:  without the fear
Speaker 5:  of being criticised.
Speaker 5:  I touch you
Speaker 5:  as I enjoy
Speaker 5:  to touch you,
Speaker 5:  meaning I stay
Speaker 5:  inside myself
Speaker 5:  and I connect
Speaker 5:  with you.
Speaker 5:  He just rolled his eyes
Speaker 5:  as saying,
Speaker 5:  yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 5:  Tuck, tuck, tuck.
Speaker 5:  There's a naughty guy
Speaker 5:  in there.
Speaker 5:  Way more mischief
Speaker 5:  than the world
Speaker 5:  has ever met.
Speaker 15:  Oh, bien sûr.
Speaker 5:  Ah, bien sûr.
Speaker 5:  I saw the way
Speaker 5:  you stroked her
Speaker 5:  as Jean-Claude.
Speaker 5:  It's all inside
Speaker 5:  of you.
Speaker 5:  You are not
Speaker 5:  incompatible,
Speaker 5:  mismatched
Speaker 5:  in everything
Speaker 5:  you wrote
Speaker 5:  on the paper.
Speaker 5:  I don't know
Speaker 5:  where you got
Speaker 5:  that story,
Speaker 5:  but it's not.
Speaker 5:  You don't know
Speaker 5:  what stuff
Speaker 5:  goes into
Speaker 5:  this guy's head,
Speaker 5:  but it may not
Speaker 5:  be nearly
Speaker 5:  that different
Speaker 5:  from yours.
Speaker 6:  And now all my stuff
Speaker 6:  is coming up
Speaker 6:  because while
Speaker 6:  I desire closeness,
Speaker 6:  there's another part
Speaker 6:  of me that's like,
Speaker 6:  get the hell
Speaker 6:  away from me.
Speaker 19:  Like, there's
Speaker 19:  protected walls
Speaker 19:  that are like,
Speaker 19:  okay, this was nice,
Speaker 19:  too much closeness
Speaker 19:  and you go over there.
Speaker 5:  She has that moment
Speaker 5:  of crosswire
Speaker 5:  between come,
Speaker 5:  come on to me,
Speaker 5:  take me,
Speaker 5:  be strong,
Speaker 5:  but then the moment
Speaker 5:  he actually does this
Speaker 5:  because of who he is
Speaker 5:  and the transference
Speaker 5:  she has,
Speaker 5:  it then switches
Speaker 5:  into I'm subjugated
Speaker 5:  and I just have
Speaker 5:  to take it.
Speaker 5:  And now we're
Speaker 5:  in the trauma mode.
Speaker 5:  So he becomes
Speaker 5:  the man she wants
Speaker 5:  him to be
Speaker 5:  and he has the power
Speaker 5:  she wants him to have,
Speaker 5:  but then it becomes
Speaker 5:  he's having power
Speaker 5:  over her.
Speaker 5:  So at 80 seconds,
Speaker 5:  the story can jinx
Speaker 5:  with the overlays
Speaker 5:  of their respective
Speaker 5:  childhood stories.
Speaker 5:  Every second,
Speaker 5:  it is a miracle
Speaker 5:  these people
Speaker 5:  manage to have sex
Speaker 5:  on occasion.
Speaker 20:  I hate needing you
Speaker 20:  because I just want
Speaker 20:  to feel independent.
Speaker 20:  I don't want
Speaker 20:  to need anyone.
Speaker 20:  I feel like I have
Speaker 20:  to apologize
Speaker 20:  for everything that I am.
Speaker 20:  That I am never enough.
Speaker 20:  That I'm never beautiful enough.
Speaker 20:  I'm never thin enough.
Speaker 20:  I'm never talented enough.
Speaker 20:  I don't say the right things.
Speaker 20:  I'm too sexual.
Speaker 20:  I'm too opinionated.
Speaker 20:  I hurt you all the time.
Speaker 23:  Then stop speaking.
Speaker 21:  That was Scott.
Speaker 21:  That was not a Sean Clark kiss.
Speaker 22:  All right,
Speaker 22:  let's do it again.
Speaker 22:  D'accord.
Speaker 23:  Don't speak and just
Speaker 5:  allow yourself to be you.
Speaker 24:  I feel like I was kissing
Speaker 24:  a different person.
Speaker 24:  That's a different kiss
Speaker 24:  than what I normally get.
Speaker 5:  I liked it.
Speaker 5:  Shut the fuck.
Speaker 23:  Ella.
Speaker 23:  Do you feel good?
Speaker 22:  Me?
Speaker 22:  You feel okay?
Speaker 25:  But why is this different?
Speaker 25:  I have been begging you
Speaker 25:  for this for years.
Speaker 5:  You can't do that.
Speaker 25:  You can't do what?
Speaker 5:  You know,
Speaker 5:  it's like,
Speaker 5:  kiss me,
Speaker 5:  kiss me,
Speaker 5:  kiss me.
Speaker 5:  I'm dying for you
Speaker 5:  to kiss me.
Speaker 5:  And when he finally kisses you,
Speaker 5:  you say,
Speaker 5:  what took you so long
Speaker 5:  to kiss me?
Speaker 5:  Yep.
Speaker 5:  And this is the place
Speaker 5:  where you need to challenge
Speaker 5:  and just say,
Speaker 5:  you're not invited here
Speaker 5:  in this moment.
Speaker 6:  And yet Jacqueline
Speaker 6:  wants to be an adult.
Speaker 6:  Jacqueline wants to find
Speaker 6:  her sexuality
Speaker 6:  and express it.
Speaker 11:  And there's this war.
Speaker 5:  Then I also understood
Speaker 5:  that the struggle
Speaker 5:  is actually,
Speaker 5:  at that moment,
Speaker 5:  the struggle is more with her.
Speaker 5:  It goes back and forth.
Speaker 5:  You know,
Speaker 5:  one minute,
Speaker 5:  one of them manages,
Speaker 5:  but then the other one.
Speaker 5:  And she was extraordinarily honest
Speaker 5:  and saying,
Speaker 5:  I'm not there.
Speaker 5:  I am.
Speaker 5:  I'm in this war.
Speaker 5:  I'm in this battle
Speaker 5:  inside my head.
Speaker 5:  I want.
Speaker 5:  I don't want.
Speaker 5:  Can I trust?
Speaker 5:  Is this the first time
Speaker 5:  you own this,
Speaker 5:  besides instead of
Speaker 5:  all putting it on him?
Speaker 6:  No, no.
Speaker 6:  I've noticed this
Speaker 6:  for the past,
Speaker 6:  what, year or so?
Speaker 6:  I feel like I've owned this.
Speaker 6:  But I think that it's,
Speaker 6:  I'm realizing now
Speaker 6:  that I can bring Jacqueline
Speaker 6:  outside to other people,
Speaker 6:  but to Jean-Claude,
Speaker 6:  to Scott,
Speaker 6:  no.
Speaker 6:  There's these huge walls
Speaker 6:  of fear.
Speaker 5:  Right.
Speaker 5:  But if you can bring
Speaker 5:  that part of you
Speaker 5:  to other men,
Speaker 5:  that's not because
Speaker 5:  he doesn't have it.
Speaker 5:  It's because you
Speaker 5:  can't do it with him.
Speaker 5:  Are we clear on that?
Speaker 5:  Mmm.
Speaker 6:  Jean-Claude has only
Speaker 6:  recently come into the picture.
Speaker 6:  That is true.
Speaker 6:  And the other things
Speaker 6:  I've experienced
Speaker 6:  for the majority
Speaker 6:  of her relationship
Speaker 6:  has been different.
Speaker 6:  It has been where
Speaker 6:  I have exposed myself
Speaker 6:  and more my true self
Speaker 6:  and it was met
Speaker 6:  with condemnation
Speaker 6:  and shame
Speaker 6:  and anger
Speaker 6:  and shut down.
Speaker 6:  So I have,
Speaker 6:  I have very good reasons
Speaker 6:  for why I feel
Speaker 6:  the way I do.
Speaker 6:  It's not all my fault.
Speaker 6:  Not at all.
Speaker 5:  Thank you.
Speaker 5:  Thank you.
Speaker 5:  He's nodding his head.
Speaker 5:  So he's in agreement
Speaker 5:  with you.
Speaker 5:  Do you need Scott
Speaker 5:  to acknowledge something?
Speaker 5:  Do you need Scott
Speaker 5:  to make amends?
Speaker 10:  Yeah.
Speaker 10:  Yeah.
Speaker 26:  That was said
Speaker 26:  without a doubt.
Speaker 26:  So,
Speaker 26:  have you ever?
Speaker 8:  I guess not
Speaker 8:  to the extent
Speaker 8:  that she needs.
Speaker 8:  I think I've
Speaker 8:  acknowledged
Speaker 8:  that I have
Speaker 8:  my own problems.
Speaker 8:  No.
Speaker 5:  Be actually
Speaker 5:  much more specific.
Speaker 5:  When I
Speaker 5:  said
Speaker 5:  or did
Speaker 5:  this
Speaker 8:  and
Speaker 8:  When I tell you
Speaker 8:  sometimes
Speaker 8:  when we're making love
Speaker 8:  or trying to
Speaker 8:  that
Speaker 8:  you're too much
Speaker 8:  or that
Speaker 8:  I can't handle
Speaker 8:  what you're asking me for.
Speaker 8:  You must feel
Speaker 8:  so unseen
Speaker 8:  and so
Speaker 8:  unwanted.
Speaker 8:  And I'm sorry
Speaker 8:  for that.
Speaker 6:  Thank you.
Speaker 6:  I've not felt
Speaker 6:  safe
Speaker 6:  or welcome
Speaker 6:  to bring my
Speaker 6:  false self
Speaker 6:  to you.
Speaker 8:  Well,
Speaker 8:  Scott's a pretty
Speaker 8:  emasculated person.
Speaker 5:  What happens
Speaker 5:  to him?
Speaker 8:  What happens
Speaker 8:  when she makes
Speaker 8:  even a simple
Speaker 8:  request?
Speaker 8:  He feels
Speaker 8:  obligated
Speaker 8:  to fulfill it
Speaker 8:  to
Speaker 8:  the detriment
Speaker 8:  of his own
Speaker 8:  pleasure.
Speaker 8:  He doesn't
Speaker 8:  take care of
Speaker 8:  himself.
Speaker 8:  and then
Speaker 8:  he loses
Speaker 8:  interest in
Speaker 8:  sex
Speaker 8:  because he's
Speaker 8:  not taking
Speaker 8:  care of
Speaker 8:  his own
Speaker 8:  needs.
Speaker 8:  So
Speaker 8:  fulfilling
Speaker 8:  the needs
Speaker 8:  of a strong
Speaker 8:  woman
Speaker 8:  has been
Speaker 8:  a big
Speaker 5:  theme.
Speaker 5:  Strong or
Speaker 5:  needy?
Speaker 8:  Is there
Speaker 8:  a difference?
Speaker 8:  Oh!
Speaker 26:  My mother!
Speaker 8:  Yeah,
Speaker 8:  my mother
Speaker 8:  was both
Speaker 8:  strong and
Speaker 8:  needy.
Speaker 8:  That's true.
Speaker 8:  So for me
Speaker 8:  there has not
Speaker 8:  been a difference.
Speaker 8:  So when I
Speaker 8:  see strength
Speaker 8:  I also
Speaker 8:  impute
Speaker 8:  need
Speaker 8:  or neediness.
Speaker 27:  You're with
Speaker 27:  somebody else
Speaker 27:  at those
Speaker 27:  moments.
Speaker 8:  Sure.
Speaker 8:  Yeah.
Speaker 8:  No,
Speaker 8:  there's definitely
Speaker 8:  a different
Speaker 8:  version of
Speaker 8:  her inside
Speaker 8:  of my
Speaker 8:  head
Speaker 8:  at those
Speaker 8:  moments.
Speaker 8:  Right.
Speaker 27:  You're her
Speaker 27:  father and
Speaker 27:  she's your
Speaker 27:  mother.
Speaker 27:  Aha.
Speaker 27:  Yeah.
Speaker 27:  Who wants
Speaker 27:  to have
Speaker 27:  sex in
Speaker 27:  the family?
Speaker 28:  Exactly,
Speaker 28:  right?
Speaker 28:  It feels
Speaker 28:  incestuous.
Speaker 6:  I've always
Speaker 6:  complained about
Speaker 6:  that.
Speaker 6:  I sometimes
Speaker 6:  want to
Speaker 6:  hit you
Speaker 6:  because I
Speaker 6:  just can't
Speaker 6:  stand what
Speaker 6:  I feel.
Speaker 6:  It feels
Speaker 29:  icky.
Speaker 29:  Icky.
Speaker 29:  Yes,
Speaker 29:  it feels
Speaker 29:  icky.
Speaker 8:  And it
Speaker 8:  doesn't feel
Speaker 8:  icky to
Speaker 8:  me.
Speaker 8:  The
Speaker 8:  closeness
Speaker 8:  and the
Speaker 8:  cuddling
Speaker 8:  and the
Speaker 8:  things that
Speaker 8:  to her
Speaker 8:  feel like
Speaker 8:  family to
Speaker 8:  me,
Speaker 8:  that's where
Speaker 8:  my sexuality
Speaker 8:  begins.
Speaker 8:  It comes
Speaker 8:  out of a
Speaker 8:  feeling of
Speaker 8:  closeness
Speaker 8:  and intimacy
Speaker 8:  and then,
Speaker 8:  oh,
Speaker 8:  now let's
Speaker 8:  be sexual.
Speaker 6:  And then
Speaker 6:  we're cuddling
Speaker 6:  on the couch
Speaker 6:  and you try
Speaker 6:  to make it
Speaker 6:  sexual and
Speaker 6:  I'm like,
Speaker 6:  oh,
Speaker 6:  don't do
Speaker 6:  this,
Speaker 6:  don't do
Speaker 6:  it,
Speaker 6:  don't,
Speaker 6:  don't make
Speaker 6:  it,
Speaker 6:  don't,
Speaker 6:  I just,
Speaker 6:  I get so
Speaker 6:  resentful that
Speaker 6:  you've taken
Speaker 6:  this moment
Speaker 6:  that felt
Speaker 6:  safe and
Speaker 6:  nurturing and
Speaker 6:  turned it
Speaker 6:  sexual.
Speaker 6:  Whereas I
Speaker 6:  want to be
Speaker 6:  sexual from
Speaker 6:  a place of
Speaker 6:  anger and
Speaker 6:  mystery and
Speaker 6:  separateness.
Speaker 8:  You want
Speaker 8:  sex with
Speaker 8:  Jean-Claude?
Speaker 14:  Yes.
Speaker 14:  Yes.
Speaker 8:  And he?
Speaker 8:  Who rides
Speaker 8:  a motorcycle
Speaker 8:  and, you
Speaker 8:  know, has
Speaker 8:  a lot of
Speaker 8:  different women
Speaker 8:  and a few
Speaker 8:  men and
Speaker 8:  is very
Speaker 8:  independent
Speaker 8:  and is not
Speaker 8:  tied down to
Speaker 8:  anyone and
Speaker 8:  simply uses
Speaker 8:  people for
Speaker 8:  his pleasure.
Speaker 5:  I'm going
Speaker 5:  to challenge
Speaker 5:  that.
Speaker 5:  That's a
Speaker 5:  caricature of
Speaker 5:  Jean-Claude.
Speaker 5:  Okay.
Speaker 5:  And I,
Speaker 5:  that's why I
Speaker 5:  want you to
Speaker 5:  think good
Speaker 5:  and sexual.
Speaker 5:  When you
Speaker 5:  hold her hand
Speaker 5:  before, when
Speaker 5:  you hold her
Speaker 5:  face before,
Speaker 5:  it is utterly
Speaker 5:  caring.
Speaker 5:  But also very
Speaker 5:  present and also
Speaker 5:  very pleasure
Speaker 5:  focused.
Speaker 8:  Unless I'm
Speaker 8:  just kidding.
Speaker 8:  Je préfère être
Speaker 8:  Jean-Claude.
Speaker 8:  Je préfère...
Speaker 5:  Mais Jean-Claude
Speaker 5:  peut donner aussi.
Speaker 15:  Peu, oh.
Speaker 5:  Jean-Claude aussi
Speaker 5:  peut donner.
Speaker 15:  Oui, oui, c'est...
Speaker 6:  Are you
Speaker 6:  flirting with her?
Speaker 6:  Non.
Speaker 30:  Non.
Speaker 30:  Seulement avec toi.
Speaker 11:  Only with you.
Speaker 6:  And all I feel
Speaker 6:  bubbling up
Speaker 6:  are all these
Speaker 6:  excuses of why
Speaker 6:  I can't be
Speaker 6:  Jacqueline and
Speaker 6:  why it's wrong
Speaker 6:  and why you
Speaker 6:  can't let that
Speaker 6:  out.
Speaker 6:  Okay.
Speaker 5:  Is there music
Speaker 5:  Jacqueline likes?
Speaker 31:  She loves
Speaker 31:  French music.
Speaker 31:  Edith Pia.
Speaker 5:  Any particular
Speaker 5:  song?
Speaker 32:  Um...
Speaker 33:  Je ne regrette rien.
Speaker 32:  Yes.
Speaker 32:  Yeah.
Speaker 5:  Does she sing it?
Speaker 34:  I don't sing it
Speaker 34:  in French.
Speaker 34:  No, I don't know it.
Speaker 5:  And as they told me
Speaker 5:  that it was a song
Speaker 5:  by Piaf and it was
Speaker 5:  Non, je ne regrette rien,
Speaker 5:  I knew the song
Speaker 5:  for one.
Speaker 5:  And so I had my
Speaker 5:  moment of recognition
Speaker 5:  and then I did
Speaker 5:  something that I
Speaker 5:  never do.
Speaker 5:  I sang.
Speaker 5:  Non, je ne regrette rien
Speaker 5:  Ni le mal
Speaker 5:  qu'on m'a fait
Speaker 5:  Ni le bien
Speaker 5:  Tout cela m'est bien
Speaker 5:  égal
Speaker 5:  It's actually very apt
Speaker 5:  for what you've
Speaker 5:  experienced.
Speaker 5:  Do you know what
Speaker 5:  she's saying?
Speaker 31:  No regret, right?
Speaker 5:  I regret not the bad,
Speaker 5:  the evil that was
Speaker 5:  done to me.
Speaker 5:  Oh.
Speaker 5:  The pain that was
Speaker 5:  caused to me.
Speaker 35:  That's why I'm
Speaker 35:  singing it for you.
Speaker 35:  Oh.
Speaker 35:  Oh.
Speaker 35:  Oh.
Speaker 35:  Oh.
Speaker 35:  Oh.
Speaker 35:  Oh.
Speaker 35:  Oh.
Speaker 35:  Oh.
Speaker 35:  Oh.
Speaker 35:  Oh.
Speaker 35:  Oh.
Speaker 35:  Oh.
Speaker 35:  Oh.
Speaker 35:  Oh.
Speaker 35:  Oh.
Speaker 35:  Oh.
Speaker 35:  Oh.
Speaker 35:  Oh.
Speaker 35:  Oh.
Speaker 35:  Oh.
Speaker 35:  Oh.
Speaker 35:  Oh.
Speaker 35:  Oh.
Speaker 35:  Oh.
Speaker 35:  Oh.
Speaker 5:  Oh.
Speaker 5:  Oh.
Speaker 5:  Oh.
Speaker 5:  Oh.
Speaker 5:  Oh.
Speaker 5:  Oh.
Speaker 5:  Oh.
Speaker 5:  So here's going to
Speaker 5:  be a challenge.
Speaker 5:  When she gets upset,
Speaker 5:  which is totally normal,
Speaker 5:  you will learn to
Speaker 5:  comfort each other
Speaker 5:  as adults
Speaker 5:  and not as one child
Speaker 5:  and one adult.
Speaker 5:  Jean-Claude can comfort.
Speaker 5:  He can tell her
Speaker 5:  a few things
Speaker 5:  and we don't have to go
Speaker 5:  and spend
Speaker 5:  the entire evening there.
Speaker 5:  And then we need
Speaker 5:  a different song.
Speaker 5:  I'm sorry.
Speaker 5:  Could be Piaf,
Speaker 5:  but it can't be this way.
Speaker 5:  Because we're not
Speaker 5:  going to sing trauma.
Speaker 6:  It's almost like
Speaker 6:  there's a switch
Speaker 6:  inside of me
Speaker 6:  that I allow
Speaker 6:  the child
Speaker 6:  to feel the pain,
Speaker 6:  but I don't always
Speaker 6:  allow the adult
Speaker 6:  to feel pleasure.
Speaker 5:  So what you want
Speaker 5:  is to help
Speaker 5:  each other stay.
Speaker 5:  Stay
Speaker 5:  with these other
Speaker 5:  parts of you
Speaker 5:  that are,
Speaker 5:  they're there.
Speaker 5:  They just don't,
Speaker 5:  they have not been
Speaker 5:  given much permission.
Speaker 5:  So,
Speaker 5:  don't make a long speech.
Speaker 5:  Just basically say,
Speaker 5:  I'm having unwanted guests.
Speaker 5:  Or something very short
Speaker 5:  that just cues,
Speaker 5:  help me stay.
Speaker 5:  Help me be in the present.
Speaker 5:  Go put some lipstick.
Speaker 8:  If you start
Speaker 8:  to wander away
Speaker 8:  and I feel you,
Speaker 8:  I can call you back.
Speaker 14:  I would like that.
Speaker 8:  And you can call me out.
Speaker 8:  You can call me out of,
Speaker 8:  out of the,
Speaker 8:  out of the forest.
Speaker 5:  So when
Speaker 5:  the wires get crossed,
Speaker 5:  you simply tell him,
Speaker 35:  speak to me in French.
Speaker 12:  Speak to me in French.
Speaker 5:  This was an adult version
Speaker 5:  of imaginary play.
Speaker 5:  The therapy itself
Speaker 5:  is a new experience
Speaker 5:  closer to the one
Speaker 5:  that the people
Speaker 5:  want to have.
Speaker 5:  It mirrors it.
Speaker 5:  Of course,
Speaker 5:  it's not a one session only.
Speaker 5:  I know they can go home
Speaker 5:  and lose it,
Speaker 5:  which is why I said,
Speaker 5:  you know,
Speaker 5:  you're going to slip.
Speaker 5:  It's how you teach people
Speaker 5:  to stay in the story.
Speaker 5:  Another story,
Speaker 5:  because they're in the story.
Speaker 5:  They're just in a stuck story
Speaker 5:  of their life
Speaker 5:  about to divorce.
Speaker 5:  This couple doesn't need
Speaker 5:  to divorce at all.
Speaker 5:  At all.
Speaker 5:  This is a couple
Speaker 5:  that has everything in them
Speaker 5:  to claim this part of them.
Speaker 5:  They deserve it.
Speaker 5:  They're entitled to it.
Speaker 2:  Esther Perel is the author
Speaker 2:  of Mating in Captivity,
Speaker 2:  Unlocking Erotic Intelligence,
Speaker 2:  available on Audible.
Speaker 2:  And her upcoming book
Speaker 2:  is The State of Affairs,
Speaker 2:  Rethinking Infidelity.
Speaker 2:  If you and your partner
Speaker 2:  would be interested
Speaker 2:  in recording a session
Speaker 2:  with Esther,
Speaker 2:  you can find out more
Speaker 2:  at estherperel.com
Speaker 2:  slash audible
Speaker 2:  or at audible.com
Speaker 2:  slash estherperel.
Speaker 2:  Where Should We Begin
Speaker 2:  is an Audible original production.
Speaker 2:  Produced by Olivia Natt
Speaker 2:  and Eva Walschover.
Speaker 2:  Produced and sound designed
Speaker 2:  by Paul Schneider.
Speaker 2:  Recorded by Noriko Okabe.
Speaker 2:  Our executive producers
Speaker 2:  are Esther Perel
Speaker 2:  and me, Jesse Baker.
Speaker 2:  Eric Newsom is our big boss,
Speaker 2:  and we couldn't do this
Speaker 2:  without Lindsay Rutowski
Speaker 2:  and June Cohen.
Speaker 2:  This is Audible.
Speaker 1:  Thanks for listening
Speaker 1:  to this episode
Speaker 1:  of the Audible original series,
Speaker 1:  Where Should We Begin
Speaker 1:  with Esther Perel.
Speaker 1:  Keep the conversation going
Speaker 1:  with more Esther
Speaker 1:  coming soon,
Speaker 1:  season two of this series
Speaker 1:  and her new audio book,
Speaker 1:  The State of Affairs.
Speaker 1:  Learn more at audible.com
Speaker 1:  slash Esther.
Speaker 1:  That's audible.com
Speaker 1:  slash E-S-T-H-E-R.
